So good morning everyone and welcome and uh for today's talk I'd like to bring up a topic uh and the purpose of bringing up this topic is not to offer some definitive teachings on it that comes to a nice great conclusion but rather to um inspire you maybe I don't know if provoke you is the right word but evoke in you uh uh reflection that you would think more deeply about this topic and how it works for you personally and I think it's a very important topic for us as individuals in our own individual life in our interpersonal life in our societal life to really reflect deeply about this and uh and understand uh how this works for us because this topic I'm going to bring up I'll name it shortly is um uh we probably all have all operating with it with it but it's often unexamined and unconsidered and so what I'm encouraging here is to take this topic and really consider it how it is for you. So the topic is what is your theory of change? What is your theory of change? And so if you're involved in changing yourself, changing your family, your community, your your society, your world, you are you operating under some theory, some hypothesis, some assumptions about how change happens. And I encounter a lot of people who want to see change but uh they've never examined their theory of change. They have a gut reaction and they have some idea of course this is how it should be you know which and uh so sometimes it's very aggressive. Some people want something to be different and their idea is to bark or worse and uh be hostile to get what they want to be happen. Other people's theory of change is to fawn and to kind of just be very gentle and kind and they're trying to get something but they think this is how you get things is to make something happen. So when we're involved in Buddhist practice uh are you involved in any process of change? Are you looking for a change when you're practicing? And if so, what is your theory of change? How is that change supposed to happen? And um and what is the understanding of how it happens? What needs to be done to be happen? And uh or do you just take it take some the word of some poor teacher who says uh yes, it's really good to meditate. You should everyone should meditate. Oh, okay. You'll feel so much better if you meditate. Okay. Well, okay. That's the my theory of change is I'll just follow this teacher's word. Um uh that so that you have a theory unexamined theory that believing in someone else is what's going to help you find your way. So often it's unexamined and to ask yourself the question, what theory do you have? What beliefs do you have around how change happens and is it really been examined and can it be examined more deeply? Can it be reconsidered? Are there better theories of how change happens? And um and so there's a few things um but I thought in this regard I I came across this quote by EB White from his book um from the book Charlotte's Web that uh says something like um every morning I awake wanting to change the world. uh or every morning I wake up uh torn torn between the desire to change the world and the inclination to savor it. This makes it very difficult to plan. So you know how do we live in this world? Is this world a world that is dire need of us to change? is about to fall apart and or is this a world where it's okay to enjoy the holiday or enjoy the Sunday and go to the park and just enjoy the natural wonder of this world and um and how do we manage these two views to say it in other terms um do we um do we care for our life or do we enjoy our life. Do we change our life or do we enjoy the life we have? So there's a whole series of things to examine in these questions of change and theories of change. And one of the first uh things to examine is so I'll offer some of these ideas of theories of change and then I'll offer a Buddhist theory of change at the end. So you'll get the Buddhist part if you want and um so the f the first thing is we have to begin with is with what we see. How do we understand the current circumstances? What do we see in the current circumstances? Do we see that the sky is falling and we have to run? Do we see that the world is burning and there's nowhere to run? Is what we see hopeless and all you can do is kind of give up or do we see that um fires that we can put out and no one else is going to do it so we should? Do we see a world where goodness prevails? Do we see a world where evil prevails? Do we see what do we how do we interpret the world? How do what do we see? How do we see ourselves? Some people see themselves in very negative ways. See themselves as somehow wrong in all the different ways that could be. Some people see themselves as wrong and that's this is how it is. They're stuck that way. Some people see themselves as being way too right. Everything is right about me and everyone else needs to understand that too. And uh and I should be praised and I everything everything I say must be true. And um well how do we see? And so the question is what are we seeing? And are we seeing accurately? Are we seeing in a useful way? And some people have this belief that if I see it, it must be true. I'll if I see it, I'll believe it. But that is kind of naive because often how we see is through the lens of interpretation, through the lens of of desires, through the lens of aversions. And um and sometimes uh how we see has been shaped by culture, shaped by family, shaped by religion, shaped by politicians. And so the way we see is not so always so accurate. So that makes this whole question of a theory of a change difficult from the very beginning. It requires really a careful consideration of what is it that I'm what's up here? What's going on here with me? What's going on here with my family? What's going on here in my place of work? What's going up here in this nation, in this world? And um and of course there are many things to see. And so part of that what we see has to do with the se the choice of our selection, what we choose to see and what we choose to ignore. And uh and so that also makes it very comp complicated because there's already a preference that goes into how we see. The way that this practice of ours can assist with this is that by calming down, by quieting the discursive mind, we begin to let go of some of the overlays, the projections, the preferences, the selectivity we have that we we bring to whatever situation we're in. So, we're seeing it very partially. We're seeing it through the lens of our desires. And it's remarkable to quiet the mind down, to quiet the thinking mind down, to quiet the desiring mind down, and to be able to see with fresh eyes. And I have not a few times been somehow uh disturbed by how I saw a person through a filter that was not accurate. uh maybe I had old information about the person and I hadn't seen how the person had changed. I wasn't ready to see the something was a person that was showing up in a very different state than how I had known them. And so I operated under assumptions that I knew the person and actually I didn't know what was salient and important at the moment because I was operating on the story, the stories, ideas, memories and all that. And I've had the wonderful experience of being quiet and calm, settled, cleared that my mind has become clear and seeing someone that I've known for a long time with fresh eyes. Really kind of just kind of allowing them to be completely as they are without needing anything from them, without wanting anything from them, without projecting it anything. I shouldn't be so absolute in my language but all that go get gets reduced dramatically and so I see the person in a more whole way. All this has been true with myself as well. We do the same thing with ourselves. We see ourselves very partially. We see ourselves through the lens of what our society expects of a person or doesn't expect of a person or what society tells us what's important. I was um there was a a little story I've told sometimes of so I moved to the I used to live in San Francisco for quite a bit of time in uh one of the poor neighbors of San Francisco and I was kind of a poor hippie and before before that and so I had uh an old car and I was very happy with this old car. I had no no questions about it, no issues around it. It was just my car. It was very simple and straightforward. But then I moved uh down here to the peninsula and uh and and at first I was living up on skyline this time was way up there in the woods kind of but I would come down periodically to Palo Alto. The main reason to be in Palo Alto was to teach this group when we were in Palo Alto days but I come down to Palo Alto and I have dinner. We taught I taught most first Monday nights had dinners and then I would go and teach. And after a few years of this, I don't know when it was, it might have taken four or five years where I I started to notice that I had one of the oldest cars in Palo Alto because even back then a lot of people had relatively new cars. And then one day there arose in my mind I should get a new car. And there and it was really clear that that desire was not because my car was falling apart and was on its last legs or was inadequate but because now I was comparing myself to what was going on in my society around me. And somehow that comparison generated this desire for a new car. And um so that that's one thing about a car. What about a new you? How are you comparing yourself to the people around you? Does it change who how you understand yourself based on the community that you're with and what's around you all the time? And I suspect some of you have lived in different communities in your life, growing up different places and being here. Most of you, I assume, are kind of local. And I can imagine that your shifting understanding of yourself and what it means to be a right person is shaped by who you compare yourself to and what goes on. So in that comparison, are you seeing yourself accurately? So you know my theory of change in 1995 I think was um uh I was involved the change I wanted was to have a new car and what was the theory of change I don't know but somehow change needed to be in response to what I saw around me change need to be about maybe my status or how people saw me and that was part of went into my idea of why change was necessary and how was and then how uh was that uh to make that change. So I went I remember I went driving around. I went to a few car dealers thinking I would get a new car and so I think it was here in Paul in Redwood City then I think it was a Honda dealership that was here and so I was driving like a little Honda Civic, a new Honda Civic and um with windows you had to use your arms to turn. Remember that? And uh and uh so I went for a drive and I guess I was driving the car and the dealer was in the passenger seat and the dealer just over here near here I think on Brewster. Remember coming up to light in El Camino and he was telling me you deserve an air conditioner. [Laughter] Wow, that idea had never crossed my mind that I would just what did I do to deserve an air conditioner. So, he was there to kind of create a whole idea about myself that um you know I guess you know he was hoping I'd buy into. So, what do we see? Do we see is we're not so innocent in seeing ourselves, seeing everything else. What is the lens through which we see it see things? What is the emotion through which we see our life? Do we see it through fear? Do we see it through inadequacy and insecurity? Do we see it through love? Do we see it through generosity? Do we see it through uh the idea that things are perfect? Is that terrible thing to say given how imperfect the world is? There are some people whose spirituality is very much centered on seeing the perfection of this moment here how it is that teacher Suzuki Roshi the Zen master in San Francisco um he made a big impact on a lot of people when he he said you're perfect just as you are and there's room for improvement. So he was holding both of them together. There's something about just perfect and we can change. So then the theory of change also involves what vision do you have for what's possible. And um there are some people who believe who are in this field of change that's called something called helotrop tropism. helotropic which means it literally means something like turning with the sun following the sun that um uh the vision we have is what one of the things that we follow. So if the vision we have is that as danger, fear about terrible people, immigrants coming to do all kinds of horrible things to you. And if that's the vision we have and we embibe this v vision, then what we see is what needs to be done is affect affected by this future that we see coming. the vision of what's going to happen. If we have a vision of peace, a vision of a world where people are generous to each other, kind to each other, if we see a vision of a family or a community or a sa like this, where we care for each other, where we respect each other, where we allow each other to be exactly who we are in some spacious kind of way. Um, accepting people Uh that's that that vision then the theory is that um just having a vision even subconsciously things begin orienting themselves in that direction just like a sunflower moves with the sun and changes according to where the sun is. So something inside of us u can start shifting and changing in profound subconscious unconscious ways depending on the vision that we live by. So what vision do you live by? What sense of a future do you live by? What sense of possibility do you have that is it one that inspires you or is it one that deflates you? Is it one that's realistic or is it too much uh a fantasy? But so a theory of change also involves a vision of what's possible. And then the question is how does that change? If you have an idea of a change, how does it come about? And um this the idea of theory of change I've thought about a fair amount in the last year or so having to do with uh what's happening more broadly in this country with politics and all that. And I see a lot of people including myself wanting to react without ever considering the theory of change. uh getting angry and yelling and making big protests as if that's going to cause a change. Is that how change happens? How does change happen? Some people believe that um change often happens with vision. And if you have a great wonderful vision and one that you really stand behind inspiring, that's more likely to happen. if you have in politics seemingly if you have a real bad vision, a frightening vision, that what makes for some people to vote for you. Um, but imagine if Martin Luther King instead of standing in Washington and giving that wonderful speech, I have a dream, imagine instead he gave a talk that was titled, I have a nightmare. What a different world we'd be living in. So, so one theory of change is that actually change happens begins happening with the vision we hold the sense of possibility and another is that change happens by um the stories we tell and many of us are telling personal stories that are undermining ourselves. Some people, some psychologists say that one of the leading causes of depression is rumination. Ruminating means repeatedly chewing over the same story, ideas about oneself, the same dire situation, same undermining, deflating kind of story that we start to drain ourselves of our vitality and we get depressed. And stories make a big difference. And so when politicians say the same story all the time over and over again, uh it can have a big huge effect if that's where we get our conditioning for how we're going to see the world and have a vision. So stories the stories we tell and sometimes it's said that uh in in the world of the academic study of religion that religions mostly exist because of their stories not their doctrines because we're telling stories about founders and different parts of religion and um and then you know what does make change I I have a wonder I have a term called the acupuncture point of change that was inspired by a person who inspire has inspired me a lot is Mahatma Gandhi that um so he was in he the British arrested him he was in jail in India in his independence movement and he spent his time in jail considering what to do next what strategy how how he was going to bring independence to to India so apparently spent I don't know how fair amount of time in jail thinking about this. Finally, he was released and um and he began to implement his strategy, his strategy for change. He started the salt march. He marched to the sea. The British had a uh a a tax or had a monopoly on salt, salt production. So no one was allowed to collect salt except they had to buy it from the British and everyone had to have salt. So um he marched to the sea and he went into the water and somehow he picked up a little piece of salt and that was enough to be arrested again. And that was and that brought the British Empire down. That was the acupuncture point of change. That little thing made a huge difference in kind of the the transition to moving in the direction. A lot more had to happen of course. But where's the occupure change for us? If we look at the whole big scenario of our life, our situation, how dire it is. Uh it's can be so overwhelming and we think we have to take a sledgehammer to whatever is going on. Maybe. But is there an acupuncture of change? Is there a story? Is a particular act? Is there something we can do? Where's that point that'll make a difference? So, um, so do we have an acupuncture point theory of change? Do we have a sledgehammer idea of change? Do we have a theory of change that someone else is responsible? We outsource all change. If we want peace in this world, other people are supposed to do it. Do we or do we insource it? Do we always understand that we have a role? I don't want to use necessarily the word responsibility, but we always begin what's my role? What can be my contribution? what way can I in a generous way make the change that I want to see in the world and uh and are you in the distress you have about your family yourself politics anything are you a little bit outsourcing the problem that the someone else is supposed to be involved in change a theory of change that I've had is that um if I feel like I really need something from some some people um and I feel strong need rather than demanding it or rather than expecting it or doing something uh uh in certain circumstances uh is if I if I have a need I offer it to the others. So for example, if you have a need to be heard by someone and this is an a theory of change. I was on the ethics committee. I did a lot of um mediating ethics problems and my theory of change around social conflict like this is that uh uh change doesn't happen until people fe people people feel heard. So that I was operating under this assumption. And so um then I lost track of what I was saying. I went on a little tangent. Can somebody remind me? Offer to people. Oh yeah. Thank you. Offer to people what I like. So sometimes I've wanted to be heard and so I will um uh I will make an effort to really understand them and hear them and make sure they feel heard. And little bit the theory is that once they feel settled and feel heard then they'll be interested in me. It doesn't always work but it's kind of a better effort than the alternative but to offer to others and I've known wonderful stories uh where people have had challenge in a relationship. A number of people told me this had to do with their in-laws and uh and uh they started giving simple gifts very not expensive gifts this is cheap small but starting giving gifts and that began to change the relationship and so rather than getting a mediator with my in-laws and let's sit down and talk about our challenges but you know these acts of kindness. So there's all these ideas of how do we how do we institute change? How does change best happen? So in Buddhism also has a theory of change. So um one of the core principles of Buddhism is everything is changing all the time. And it's the teachings on ana poly word for impermanence or inconstancy that everything is changing. But change in uh the change that we live in, the change in the world, change in ourselves, change in society is not random and we have a role in that change and that we our our contribution to the change is to either have the change move in a wholesome direction or an unh wholesome direction. And that's kind of the two different choices. I suppose sometimes it's neither, but either wholesome or unh wholesome. And um and so it's a little bit like or very much like uh going down a river in a canoe with a rudder and um and the river is doing most of the work of if you're in the current flowing down. But you see the sandbank, you see the rapids on the side, one side of the river. And if you have enough warning, you just adjust the rudder a little bit to avoid the danger and to stay in the good current. So uh here, uh the direction of the rudder makes a huge difference. So the idea that we're living in a river of life is kind of a deep kind of metaphor that Buddhism uses. And so we want to stay in the current is the Buddhist metaphor to avoid the sandbanks, avoid the edges where the tigers are waiting. Uh we we're trying to avoid the rapids. And um and so it's what's what's wonderful here in this metaphor is that um at the same time as avoiding the dangers, we're putting ourselves in the good place. It's the same movement just switching the rudder. You have enough warning just adjusting the rudder a little bit. So the way that theory of change works in Buddhism is there is change. Buddhism is about instituting a change. Buddhism has a a vision of change and and having that vision is some in some places in Buddhism considered um uh a whole new stage of practice. Uh the stage of having a vision before for a beginner they don't they quite yet have the personal vision of what's possible. But once we see it or have a sense of it or personal vision of how much peace our hearts can have, how much freedom our hearts can have, how much ease and happiness and well-being that's possible in our deep inner life. Wow, this is possible. Not only is it possible, but why should I sacrifice it for these other purposes? This feels wholesome. This feels whole. This feels now I feel whole with this sense of peace and well-being. This is possible. We might not always feel this way. We might just have a hint of this possibility, but at some point we in Buddhism that he has to have a vision of what's possible. And um and maybe it's mostly some people's in more of a negative vision which is I don't have to suffer that this way anymore. I've suffered a lot. I've wasted much of my life suffering unnecessarily. This is no longer necessary. For some people, that's very motivating. For some people, it's the other side of the hand of that that when we don't suffer, there's peace, there's happiness. So there's a vision of what's possible. And what's possible that vision is at the end of the river the ocean at the end in Buddhism there's a big ocean of freedom that we can the river will take us to but we're adjusting the rudder all the time and why this is an important metaphor is that in in uh in the dharma we have a very important role so we can't we can't outsource our peace we can't outsource they inner freedom we have to do it ourselves we have to step up to the plate they say maybe on the other hand we have to realize that it's not only up to us just like it's not it you don't cause the the canoe to go down the river you just create the conditions that allows the current to carry it in Buddhism We don't create the change, the personal change we're looking for. We create the conditions that allow the inner growth to happen. The metaphor for change, personal change in Buddhism is a metaphor of growth. That we're growing something. We're allowing something, some natural processes inside of us to grow and develop. We're cultivating something. We're not creating something. And so, uh, and how do we cultivate and create the conditions that allows something positive and useful to grow? And the the the um and that is um it turns out we don't have to choose between changing the world and savoring the world. We can savor changing the world. They can be the one and the same thing to use the quote. But to say it in a different way, we can care for ourselves. We can care for our life and enjoy our life at the same time. And how? When the efforts we make to change are done wholesomely are done in a way that feels good, that feels healthy, that feels heartwarming, that feels inspiring, feels nice to do something rather than involve in change with greed, rather than being changed with making change through hostility and animosity. rather than changing it uh with a very heavy critical self- view like yeah I know I have to change I'm supposed to be more generous but I'm such a lousy person and you know so I'll do my best but this is you know I'm pretty lousy and you know okay I'll do it but that's not inspiring. So the idea is to find ways in Buddhism to make changes to whatever change you're going to do it in beautiful ways and the word beautiful in the poly word kalana also means ethical. So ethical and beauty are the same in Buddhism. wholesome. The word wholesome is also kind of means ethical and beautiful or kind of synonyms for this. So how we do the change is as in Buddhism is as important as the change we're going to make. Don't give up the wholesome. always find what is the wholesome what is the beautiful what's the ethical way to institute to instigate change and what is the vision that we have in Buddhism the vision is also wholesome the vision is also a vision that is beautiful that is ethical and that is uh really feels like it's integrally part of the whole that's what wholesome means means in my mind and how do we do all this? How do we have a theory of change in Buddhism? How do we see what's going on clearly and and realistically? How do we have a vision that's inspiring? And how do we go about doing knowing what is wholesome and beautiful? This is one of the purposes of meditation is to uh is to practice regularly and seriously enough that there starts to be a shift inside where the distractions of the mind, the preoccupations of the mind, the judgments of the mind, the fears of the mind, the greed and greeds of the mind, hostilities of the mind have all had a chance to settle enough. They don't have to go away, but subtle enough that we begin feeling and sensing there's much more here than this than the narrow selective way in which we've seen our life up until that point. Too many people live in a too narrow world through the lens of particular interpretations, ideas of who they are and what the world is and what needs to happen. The function of meditation is to relax that narrowness. So we start opening up wide the vision, the wider sense of wholeness, the wider sense of what's possible with a vision that's cleared out of its selectivity, cleared out of its bias, cleared out of its um preconceived ideas enough that we start seeing and feeling and experiencing for ourselves what's possible. So we clear the space so the sun of awareness, the sun of life can shine on what is it that wants to grow inside. And that's the in Buddhism is to really do what's wholesome so the wholesome can grow. What is wholesome is waiting for us. That's what there's deep inside there. The seed Buddhist idea is there's seeds inside that want to sprout and want to grow and the right conditions what will grow are wholesome seeds. If you're not careful you have also unh wholesome seeds inside. And if you're not careful those are the seeds that you might sprout and might might grow. And when that those grow sometimes in Buddhism, uh they're called uh vines. And they have this idea that a vi a vine can take over and cover a tree to kill it. So be careful what you grow. So a theory of change. What is your theory of change? Do you have one? Is it a good one? Is it a helpful one? Is it and and From the from the perspective of this talk today, does your theory of change inspire you? Does it nourish you? Does it give you a sense of inspiration to live a beautiful, ethical, and wholesome life? And maybe as important, is your theory of change one that's going to make this world that we live in a better place? bringing peace and happiness, care, compassion to this world. And wouldn't it be wonderful if these two visions, the vision you have for yourself, the vision you have for the world, that uh are one and the same. They don't have to be any different. So, theory of change. So, did I give you something to think about? That was my goal. So uh so I'd encourage you to u talk to people about it and uh find friends and strangers and say I'm supposed to talk about theory of change and my theory of change would can we talk about this? I'd like to hear yours first or something. So may you reflect on theory of change and in doing so I hope all of us will change the world for a better place. Thank you.