So hello and welcome welcome to this uh meditation on freedom on the American the freedom day here in the United States. And may it be that we understand the full depth of inner freedom that uh can be the great foundation for an outer freedom for a whole country. And so we are here to uh learn about samadei and insight as a foundation for a phenomenal capacity for an inner well-being and inner freedom. Uh and the simplest way of understanding it is freedom from suffering. And uh the more a little bit more developed understanding of it is that um it's the freedom that will allow the most beautiful and wholesome parts of our heart to take the lead for how we live in this world. So um so if you are going to if there's a very dear wonderful friend old friend that you haven't seen maybe for a very long time maybe decades even because of whatever circumstance but it turns out that they're going to be in town and there's a 1-hour period that uh they're available to have lunch with you and uh and you're looking forward to that. that's important for you and and so maybe you have things you have to do that morning and so you're involved with your responsibilities and and you've set it set enough time aside to get to the place for lunch and to meet with your friend and uh and then you heading there. You're walking to it or driving there, whatever you're doing and um and then you start uh getting notifications about emails. You get notifications about wonderful opportunities. You get uh see billboards. You go past stores with interesting displays of things for sale in the window. Uh you go by a uh important demonstration that's happening for some kind of social justice issue that you're it's dear to you, important for you. you go by um uh you know so all kinds of things all kinds of things happen on the way and uh you understand very well that you only have an hour with your wonderful old friend and so you just hold the course you stay you have important thing to do you don't get distracted you don't get pulled into these things and in a certain way some of them are clearly distractions. Some of them are clearly uh unsatisfactory in general to could be involved in window shopping for things you can't even buy and getting upset about why you can't buy them. Uh some of them are valuable to do, but given how wonderful it would be to see your friend, uh it's unsatisfactory or it's it's less satisfactory. It's like what's really important now is here to see this wonderful friend. And so you hold the course. You're so steady and you're not a aver aversion towards anything. Isn't just like now this is what's the task at hand is. So when we meditate we are here to see uh in a sense a long lost friend. We become our own best friend. We become invaluable to just to connect to ourselves to see parts of ourselves that easily gets lost in the busyiness of daily life in the preoccupations of the mind in the obsessions of the mind and uh the advertisements the notifications of the mind provides us the images that become window shopping in the mind that there's so many ways the mind can go. But we have this very important task and in relationship to this important task of really connecting deeply here to the best friend within that uh all these other things are less satisfying, less important, not important enough to get sidetracked with. So part of the function of samadei, part of the function of insights, part of the for for samadei is to hold the course to to stay here in a nice supportive peaceful way, not straining, not pushing but steady here. And the function of uh insight, one of them is to understand that anything else that pulls us away takes us away from this really important task at hand. That these other things, as important as they might be to think about, to be involved in, to react to, they're less satisfying. the less meaningful with in in this wonderful hour we have wonderful few minutes we have to deeply connect to something profound here within us and for today I'd like to say that uh the capacity to discover uh the uh the best friend that you will ever have can be discovered deep inside of your own self and um so to assume a meditation posture. And I suspect that for many of you that if you sit down at lunch with this old good dear friend, you you sit down, you don't automatically slump into the chair. probably there's a certain kind of alertness in the posture, delight in the posture, like oh here we are and there's a certain kind of wonderful energy arising from deep inside that animates your posture about the goodness of this moment and to offer this to yourself to meet yourself. Sit down with yourself with a posture that you're going to meet a dear respectful friend and to gently close your eyes. And just maybe you can bring a smile to your face, a half smile, at the delight of meeting this old friend that's been with you your whole life, but maybe, just maybe, hasn't really been seen or contacted that often. But how fortunate it is to sit down here and now and then to begin the process of settling and stabilizing so that there's a kind of a direct undistracted journey to be with a friend. Taking a few long, slow, full breaths. Settling in on the exhale. Taking a deep breath. Relaxing the body. Inhaling and feeling a broad sense of the body. Exhaling a broad release of the body. Letting the breath return to normal and continuing a process of settling In every relaxing of the body, let it be a relaxing into the grounding spot of breathing. The place where breathing begins or ends in the depth of your torso. Settle into there. Feeling on the inhale. Feeling muscles of your face. Exhaling. Relaxing the face. And relaxing. Settling into the breathing. Feeling the shoulders. And on the exhale, softening the shoulders while at the same time is settling into the grounding place. Feeling the belly and settling into the belly. Quietly breathing but connecting to the grounding place. The deepest place where you can feel and sense breathing in your body and to let go of all things, all thoughts, distractions, concerns because breathing being absorbed in breathing is the direct journey to see your best friend within, to meet the best friend. And nothing at this moment has any any more importance than visiting your friend. Everything else is not as satisfying, not as important, takes you away from something invaluable. And for these minutes here with the support of your breathing, stay on track. Stay with this gentle journey that will take you closer and closer. to meeting a best friend within. Having the wisdom to see that you're involved in distractions, anything that distracts you from being on this very valuable journey. me to sit down here with something invaluable. The deepest friend within. Stay on the journey. Stay present. with what's valuable here and now deep inside. Either because you feel it, know it, or you feel and know the journey there. And then as we come to the end of this sitting to take a moment some moments to feel recognize eyes. Whatever is really good about being present here in the meditation in yourself. Is there some way of being present here and now? That's satisfying for you or at least more satisfying than how how you usually go about your day and go about your thinking and preoccupations. Is there some way of being alive right now? that you'll miss once you get up from meditation and get involved in the activities of your day. And if there is some way of be being right now that's valuable for you or you appreciate, why give it up? Why sacrifice it for a way of being that's less satisfying? Maybe what you're discovering here in meditation can be a way in which you can meet anyone as if they're a good friend. A simplicity of being, a simplicity of presence, a clear attention to others in an undistracted way can be the vehicle for kindness, for friendliness, for respect, care. May it be that this meditation that we do is here for the benefit and well-being of this world. May what we learn here in meditation help us to enter the world with a gift of well-wishing. May all beings be happy. May all beings be safe. May all beings be peaceful. May all beings be free. [Music] Thank you. So hello and welcome to this uh next talk on series on insight uh the deeper insights into what's usually called the three characteristics. But in the early uh teachings of the Buddha, these are called the three perceptions or the three recognitions that as practice deepens, we begin recognizing something that's invaluable in helping us on the path to freedom, to liberation, helping us on the path to connect to the deepest parts of uh well-being that we can have. And the first of these recognitions is a deeper and deeper recognition, perception, a wisdom around inconstancy, impermanence, change, things becoming different. The second one which is a topic right now is a deep recognition, a deep wisdom, understanding about duka. And the word duka is usually translated as suffering when it's translated into English. And as such is maybe a neverending process of becoming wiser and wiser about how we suffer, how we have stress, destress, how we have uh make things worse for ourselves. uh and in doing so to understand something more and more about the opposite of uh suffering maybe in shorthand we call it happiness and uh sometimes maybe peace because the primary way the Buddha talked about uh positive emotions that come into play with the deeping deepening practice with the freedom is happiness and peace or maybe the opposite of uh is um some deep feeling of uh contentment or satisfaction or being at home in our in ourselves in this world in this body. And so to begin appreciating that we can have wisdom, a deep understandings can arise from how from suffering itself. Rather than seeing suffering as only a problem, only something unwelcome, only something overwhelming, only something that we should get rid of and fix and take care of, only something that tells us that we've do we've done something wrong or something like that. The approach here in the dharma is to be able to be willing to see uh suffering as a vehicle to freedom as something not to shy away from but something to see directly and honestly so we can come to a deep understanding a deep recognition of what's happening here and the nature of suffering itself. And um and in this regard different people will have different translations and each different translation of suffering of duka is valuable perspective window to see it in a different way. And uh one of the translation translations that people like to prefer is uh unsatisfactoriness that um uh so the simple way of saying it is that everything is always changing and there's something very deeply unsatisfactory about trying to stop the change, trying to hold on to things as they are. uh and um and it's unsatisfactory because it doesn't work. If uh you're trying to stop yourself from aging, um people spend a lot of money to somehow stop the the signs of aging. Um faceelifts and makeup and exercising and all kinds of ways we're trying to stay young in some way. some of them it's valuable to do and uh and have you I'm not not saying we shouldn't do some of it but if we're attached to it holding on expecting to be successful for our whole lifetime uh that's going to cause a lot of suffering and um we will age and we will our bodies will change our capacities will change and if we're holding on to how things were um that's un an unsatisfactory effort. Uh it's much more satisfying to find our freedom with change, to find our capacity to open up and be expansive and to be delighted and happy and peaceful with all the inevitable changes that will happen in this life. This is a tall order in all the complexities of life. But uh don't don't choose one really complicated deep way and say that that this is not right. I have to feel like it's unsatisfactory or not right. But we can become wiser and wiser in recognizing that the activities of our mind, what we're preoccupied with, what we do with our mind is uh that the craving, the holding on, the tightening of the mind that is unsatisfactory. Maybe in some ways we can recognize it's very unsatisfactory to continue with this example uh to lose our capacities as we got older to have all kinds of things change as we get older. It's it's not very satisfying, of course. But what the dharma is looking at is how it's unsatisfactory to cling to it or resist it that what we're adding on top of it we can feel uh is not the best for us. It's making things worse. And um and so as we practice more and more uh the sensitivity, the insight that can come uh the recognition, the understanding, the perception that becomes clearer and clearer is what activities in our minds that we do, what sources of motivation, impulses to how to live, how to speak, how to act in the world, how to think, how to understand the attitudes we have. What where there does it start feeling unsatisfactory and the beauty of this dharma practice is that it is not a matter of analysis. It's not a matter of you know calculating how unsatisfactory it is or having some policy that it's unsatisfactory but rather we're settling ourselves. We're quieting ourselves. We're touching into something that's here inside of us that's deeply satisfying. That it's satisfying to feel peace. It's satisfying to feel at ease with oneself. It's satisfying to be calm. It's satisfying to have some deep wellspring of happiness and well-being. That there is something satisfying way of being. Just enough. It doesn't have to be dramatic. Just enough to see that the activities or what we do with our mind those are and where we lose the satisfactory feeling that those feelings are unsatisfactory and this is what many people are blind to. There's a compulsivity. There's an authority to our preoccupations, our concerns, our attachments. The ways we get stressed, the ways we get tight, the ways we feel like things have to be different, the ways that we resist, the ways that we hold on to me, myself, and mine. The ways that we we think that uh we have to save the world. There's so many different ways that uh we're convinced to give up our deeply satisfying inner peace for agitation, for stress, for suffering. And that we're so convinced in it that uh or sometimes obsessed about it, so attached to it that we don't even know we're distracted. We don't even know the sacrifice we're making. We're so distracted by distractions, we don't even know we're distracted. We're so involved in our stress that we don't think it it need can be any other way. We give so much authority to our self-t talk, our ruminations, our self-criticism, self-p preoccupations, those thoughts that we believe it can't be any other way. This is the truth. And the way it makes it um undermines us, the way that the way we think depresses us or alarms us or or distresses us or makes us feel guilty or inadequate. Uh it just feels like it's just part and parcel of the truth. And uh we're so involved in it, we don't think there's any other option. This is the how things are. And uh so this way in which we lose ourselves in unsatisfactory states of mind that seem so real and so convincing and so absolute. We need powerful medicine to break through that and learn another way. and samadei settling meditation insight deeper understanding can be a powerful support and one of the ways is to begin appreciating that that we the whatever way we are now there's some connection some deeper way fuller way happier way of being just enough that we recognize that the different way is unsatisfactory Maybe we're already stressed, but then something else happens and now we're even more stressed. And the and what the understanding is, you know, the previous stress was was better. Now I'm involved in some higher stress. So it might may just to be silly example, maybe you're late for an appointment and so it's stressful and you're kind of involved in trying to get to the place on time and you're worried about the consequences of being late and then um you see a window display in a store and it isn't just simply you're attracted to it, but now you're stressed because you you you know you want to have it and you want to get it a good price and should you go to some other stores to check it out and now you can feel your stress level go even higher than it was before. Wisdom tells us oh to add this level of stress is unsatisfying. This is unsatisfactory and we have a clear insight clear recognition understanding of something that's now it's unsatisfactory. I don't have to do this. As the stress levels go down more and more, we get a better better reference point for how this works. If we're already really stressed out, one more aspect of stress is we don't see the difference. It's all just a pile of stress. As we get calmer and calmer, settled in better, that insight into unsatisfactoriness becomes more and more uh clear. And then if we get below the stress level and start feeling a sense of well-being that gives another different kind of vantage point for how we sacrifice well-being for something which is activity of the mind which is unsatisfactory. And over time we get more and more wisdom about not only about what is unsatisfactory unsatisfying but what the mind can do. But even more important, we see we have the the opportunity. We see we can not take that road, not get involved. We can let go of that, not do it. We have a much better thing to do. We have something much more valuable to do. And that is to come back here in a deep way because it's in here in ourselves we discover our best friend. We discover the deepest levels of care, love, peace, happiness, well-being. Here is where we discover an inner beauty where we can really value ourselves in a deeper deeper way as our best friend. And that in turns this deeper insight into unsatisfactoriness also allows us to see other people in better ways because we begin recognizing the unsatisfactory ways which we add projections, judgments, interpretations on them. That diminishes our own happiness but also does very unfortunate things for the people that we're with. And to see the unsatisfactoriness of bringing stress to other people, the unsatisfactoriness to see them in a bad light. And the deep satisfaction of seeing people in their goodness, and their kindness, and their potential, in what's possible in them, and to bring love and care, respect to everyone. May insight into suffering, insight into unsatisfactoriness, support you in a wonderful process of choosing the satisfactory way of living your life moment by moment. So, thank you on this Independence Day in the United States and um where we're learning how to find independence and freedom in our own hearts and may the freedom and independence of our own hearts be the foundation for what we offer the world. So, thank you. And uh one announcement that maybe interests a few of you. I was just reminded and kind of delightfully that on Tuesday evenings on the east coast it's at 700 p.m. the insight meditation society has a online offerings. long time ago they invited me to come to their book club uh to talk about my translation of the Dhamapada ancient uh very important ancient canonical text poetry and uh so I'll be doing that on Tuesday and it's free as part of the book club and partly I'm kind of delighted and inspired somehow that um almost 700 people have signed up for it so it's not like a small intimate book club which maybe I thought it was going to be but it had maybe with that number of people I thought wow this this is a different kind of experience so I thought maybe I would offer you a chance to come as well. So thank you very much and I look forward to coming back here on Monday.